# Materials for the Job
1. M/S Flat bar: 2 pcs
2. M/S Electrode size 3.15 mm: 10 SWG

# Tools and Equipments Required for the Job
1. Steel foot rule
2. Try squire
3. Scriber
4. Hacksaw blade and frame
5. File
6. Chipping hammer
7. Ball-peen Hammer
8. Electrode
9. Leather apron and Hand Gloves
10. Welding screen and Helmet
11. Chisel
12. Tongs etc.

# Sequence of the Job
1. Holding
2. Measuring 
3. Marking 
4. Cutting 
5. Filing 
6. Squiring 
7. Welding 
8. Cleaning 

# Description of the week performed:
## 1st day
1. Introduction to Arc Welding. Classifications of Welding. 
2. Safety precautions for Arc Welding
3. Study about various tools and equipments used in Arc Welding shop.
4. Discussion for Arc Welding Machine. Types of welding machines and their uses (AC transformer, DC Motor generator, Rectifier, etc.)
5. Discuss the terms of Arc Welding, Brazing Soldering, Current, Arc Length, Arc Blow, Electrode, Flux, Bead, Deposit, Electrode Holder, Earth Clamp, Slag, Root Run, Root Gap, Tack Weld, Splatter, Undercut, Porosity, Blow Hole or Gas Pockets, etc.
6. Electrode: types of electrodes, flux coating, size, current carrying capacity, etc.
7. Engineering Process of Metal joining. Types of Metal joining, welding position, etc.
8. Edge preparation, importance of edge preparations.
9. TIG Welding, MIG Welding, Gas Welding, etc.

## 2nd Day
1. Discuss about Gas Welding.
2. Safety precautions used in Gas Welding.
3. Discuss about gas welding related tools and equipments. Oxygen cylinder, acetylene cylinder, blow pipe or hose, torch, regulator, purifier, back pressure valve, cylinder key, etc.
4. Discuss about gas welding terms, backfire, false back, filler road, nozzle, overheat, etc.
5. Discuss about color codes of cylinder.

## 3rd Day
Received practical material for welding job hence measuring, cutting, filing, squiring practice are done.

## 4th day
Free hand Arc Welding practice is done. Use M/S Electrode size 3.15 mm = 10 SWG. Position is flat or down hand position. Current setting - 130 in amps. Rectifier machine is used.

## 5th day
The final welding bead (or run) has been made using an M/S electrode of size 3.15 mm (10 SWG). The welding position is flat, also known as the down-hand position. The current setting is 130 A, and a rectifier welding machine is used.

# What is Welding?
Welding is a technique of joining two pieces of similar or dissimilar metals permanently with the help of suitable heat. It may be carried out with or without the application of pressure and with or without the use of filler metal.

## Classification of Welding Process on Methods
Welding process may be broadly classified under two main headings:

1. Fusion or Non Pressure Welding:
   - For example:
     1. Arc Welding: metallic arc welding, carbon arc welding
     2. Gas Welding: oxy-acetylene, oxy-hydrogen
2. Pressure Welding or Non-fusion Welding:
   - For example
     1. Resistance welding
     2. Forge welding

## Safety Precautions for Arc Welding

1. Don't make welding without cleaning the work pieces properly.
2. Do not touch the hot job with naked hand.
3. Do not see the arc rays through naked eye.
4. Do not weld continuously near a whitewashed wall, as the arc rays are reflected from the surface.
5. Keep dry sand and water to put off the fire in welding shop.
6. Do not run the machine, if there is no work.
7. Rubbing the electrode from right hand to left hand when the electrode stick (touch) the job.
8. Don't weld without final preparation of the job.
9. While chipping the welding beads, use chipping goggles.
10. Don't keep the coated electrode in damp place, otherwise the flux coating may be damaged.
11. Don't weld or join any kind of work or job without knowing the metal character.

## Name of the various tools and equipments required in Arc Welding Shop

1. Arc Welding machine: AC transformer, Rectifier, DC Motor Generator, etc.
2. Two cable: one is connected with electrode holder and another is connected with earth clamp.
3. One eye shield or welding helmet
4. Leather apron and hand gloves
5. Electrode
6. Electrode holder
7. Earth clamp
8. Chipping hammer and goggles
9. Welding table (metallic)
10. Tongs
11. Steel foot rule
12. Try squire
13. Sand bucket
14. Ball pin hammer
15. File (rough and smooth)
16. Hacksaw frame with blade
17. Center punch
18. Divider
19. Caliper (out and inside)
20. Scriber etc.

- **Welding Transformer**: In arc welding with an AC supply, the voltage range typically used is 80 to 100 volts, whereas the main power supply in factories is usually between 220 and 440 volts. Therefore, a device is required to step down the higher supply voltage to the lower voltage needed for welding. This device is called a transformer. An AC welding transformer can only operate with an AC main supply. Transformers are of two types:
  1. **Step Up Transformer**: The transformer used for raising the voltage is called step up transformer.
  2. **Step Down Transformer**: this transformer is used to lower the voltage, so it is called Step Down Transformer. 

- **Generator**: A generator is a source of electrical energy. It produces electricity when driven by a prime mover such as a turbine, engine, or motor. A generator may be either AC or DC, supplying alternating current or direct current respectively. The input to a generator is mechanical torque, and the output is electric current.

- **Motor**: Motor is just the reverse of generator in the sense that it is fed with electricity and converts the electrical energy into the mechanical energy. Its output is mechanical torque. Motor may be AC or DC type.

- **DC Welding Motor Generator**: A DC welding generator is a device used in electric arc welding that operates with the help of a motor. In this setup, the motor and generator are mounted on the same shaft. The motor can be conveniently operated using an AC supply. The arc voltage is maintained between 15 V and 45 V, while the open-circuit voltage (to facilitate arc initiation) is kept between 60 V and 100 V. Depending on requirements, the generator can supply current ranging from 20 A to 1000 A.

- **AC/DC Welding Rectifier**: An AC/DC welding rectifier is a device used in electric arc welding that can supply both AC and DC current. It consists of a step-down transformer, with the output connected to a rectifier unit that converts AC to DC. The DC output is then connected to the positive and negative terminals, from which the welding supply is taken through welding cables. The machine can also be designed to provide either AC or DC welding current by means of an operating switch fitted to the rectifier unit.


## Current Carrying Capacity of Different Size of Electrodes

| Electrode size (in mm) | Electrode size (in swg) | Current for Light Works (in amps) | Current for Heavy Works (in amps) | Current for Normal Works (in amps) |
| :----------------------: | :-----------------------: | :---------------------------------: | :---------------------------------: | :----------------------------------: |
|          6 mm          |          4 swg          |                220                |                320                |                260                |
|          5 mm          |          6 swg          |                180                |                240                |                210                |
|          4 mm          |          8 swg          |                140                |                180                |                165                |
|        3.15 mm        |         10 swg         |                90                |                130                |                110                |
|         2.5 mm         |         12 swg         |                55                |                85                |                 70                 |
|          2 mm          |         14 swg         |                40                |                60                |                 60                 |
|          1 mm          |         16 swg         |                25                |                40                |                 30                 |

## Different Types of Tools used in Welding Shop 
1. **Measuring Tools** 
    1. Steel foot rule 
    2. Measuring tap 
    3. Try square 
    4. Caliper 
    5. Divider 
2. **Marking Tools**
    1. Scriber 
    2. Punch (center, dot, prick, number, figure)
3. **Cutting Tools** 
    1. Hacksaw frame with blade 
    2. Chisel 
    3. Power saw 
    4. File 
    5. Drill 
4. **Holding Tools**
    1. Table vice 
    2. Tongs 
5. **Hand Tools**
    1. Hammer 
    2. Wrench 
    3. Screw Driver 

----------

## Edge Preparation and Joint Design in Welding 
- **Edge Preparation for Welding**: Edge preparation is the process of shaping the edges of the metal pieces to be welded. It is also referred to as beveling, veering, or grooving. The edges can be prepared by machining, oxy-acetylene flame cutting, grinding, or filing.

- **Purpose of Edge Preparation**: The main purpose of edge preparation is to get complete penetration while depositing the weld metal and to get the more strength of the welding joint. 

As per the thickness of the metal, edge preparation is performed. The bevel angle is normally kept at about $40\degree$.

- **Gap**: Commonly referred to as the "root gap." A clearance of 1 to 3 mm is usually maintained between the two edges of a butt joint to ensure full penetration of the weld metal.

### Types of Welding Joint 
- There are 5 types of welding joints which are in general use. 
    1. Butt Joints 
    2. Lap Joints 
    3. 'T' Joints 
    4. Corner Joints 
    5. Edge Joints 

### Welding Positions 
- There are five types of welding positions. 
    1. Flat position 
    2. Inclined position 
    3. Horizontal position 
    4. Vertical position 
    5. Over head position

## Electrodes 
### Electrode Size 
- The size of an electrode is measured and designated by the diameter of the core wire. 
- Electric Arc was first discovered by Sir Humphry Deny. 

### Arc Welding Electrode
An electrode is made of a metallic core wire that is uniformly coated with flux. During flux coating, about 20 mm of the electrode is left bare at one end to allow insertion into the electrode holder. This bare portion of the core wire also facilitates the transmission of full current from the electrode holder to the tip of the electrode. Electrodes are manufactured in two standard lengths: 350 mm and 450 mm.

### Types of Electrode 
- There are 3 main types of electrodes 
    1. Bare electrode 
    2. Coated or covered electrode 
    3. Carbon electrode (generally use of carbon electrode is rear in welding) 

### Types of Coated Electrode 
- There are four types of coated electrode 
    1. **Light coated electrode**: the coating factor for light coated electrode is 1.25 to 1.3. 
    2. **Medium coated electrode**: the coating factor for medium coated electrode is 1.4 to 1.5. 
    3. **Heavy coated electrode**: the coating factor for heavy coated electrode is 1.6 to 2.2. 
    4. **Super Heavy coated electrode**: the coating factor for super heavy coated electrode is above 2.2. 

## Weld Defects
1. External Defects 
    1. Incorrect profile 
    2. Cracks 
    3. Craters 
    4. Spatter 
    5. Edge or plate melted off
    6. Undercut 
    7. Lack of penetration, etc. 
2. Internal Defects 
    1. Porosity 
    2. Blow hole or gas pockets 
    3. Lack of fusion 
    4. Internal cracks 
    5. Slag inclusion, etc. 

## Terms Related in Arc Welding 
- **Electric Arc**: The current flows in continuously between positive and negative terminal is known as Electric Arc. 
- **Arc Length**: The distance between electrode and the job remaining once arc is formed is known as arc length. 
- **Electrode holder**: It is a holding device, used to hold the electrode during arc welding is known as electrode holder. 
- **Filter Lance**: to protect the eyes from the harmful rays produced during arc welding, the colored glass used at eye shield is known as Filter Lance. 
- **Cavity/Blow Holes/ Gas Pockets**: The holes formed in welding bead during welding are called Cavity or Blow Holes or Gas Pockets. 
- **Porosity**: The gaseous holes formed by gas entrapment during solidification are known as porosity. 
- **Crater**: the depressed portion formed at the end of a welding bead is called a Crater. 
- **Slag**: the non-metallic layer formed on weld metal is known as slag. 
- **Tacking**: Small welding spots made to hold parts of the metal in position before final welding are called Tacking. 

## Cast Iron Welding by Arc 
- Cast iron is a ferrous metal. The shapes of these jobs are cooked in molds, and such jobs are made from cast iron, which is prepared by mixing pig iron with silicon, manganese, sulfur, phosphorus, and iron. Cast iron has a melting temperature of approximately $1150 \degree C$ and an oxidation temperature of about $1350 \degree C$.

## Welding Power Sources 
### 1. AC Motor Generator 
In this setup, a generator is driven by a suitable AC motor. The average output voltage of the generator is 25 V, while the current ranges from 25 to 100 A. The voltage can be adjusted to the desired value using a rheostat. 

### 2. Diesel Engine Generator Set 
It this set, the drive is given by a diesel engine. Rest of the system is same as in case of AC motor generator. Diesel engine generator sets are used in the areas where electricity is not available. 

### 3. Transformer Rectifier Set
This set allows current to flow only in one direction because it contains a one-way valve or solid-state rectifier installed on the electrode side of the secondary coil. It can supply both straight polarity and reverse polarity power. Rectifiers are of two types:

1. Silicon diode
2. Selenium plate

### 4. Welding Transformer Set
This set is used to step down the voltage supply. It consists of a primary and a secondary coil. The input is applied to the primary winding, and by electromagnetic induction, current flows through the secondary coil. The output can be controlled as required.

