# Pneumatic System 
- Pneumatic technology deals with the study of behavior and applications of compressed air in our daily life in general and manufacturing automation in particular. 
- Pneumatic systems use air as the medium which is abundantly available and can be exhausted into the atmosphere after completion of the assigned task. 

## Basic Components 
- Basic components of a pneumatic system are: 
    1. **Air filters**: These filter out the contaminants from the air.
    2. **Compressor**: Compressed air is generated by using air compressors. Air compressors are either diesel or electrically operated.
    3. **Air cooler**: During compression operation, air temperature increases. Therefore, coolers are used to reduce the temperature of the compressed air.
    4. **Dryer**: The water vapor or moisture in the air is separated from the air by using a dryer.
    5. **Control Valves**: Control valves are used to regulate, control and monitor for direction, flow, pressure, etc.
    6. **Air Actuator**: Air cylinders and motors are used to obtain the required movements of mechanical elements of pneumatic system.
    7. **Electric Motor**: Transforms electrical energy into mechanical energy. It is used to drive the compressor.
    8. **Receiver Tank**: The compressed air coming from the compressor is stored in the air receiver.

### Receiver Tank 
- The air is compressed slowly in the compressor. But since the pneumatic system needs continuous supply of air, this compressed air has to be stored.
- The compressed air is stored in an air receiver. The air receiver smoothens the pulsating flow from the compressor. It also helps the air to cool and condense the moisture present.
- Generally the size of receiver depends on:-
    - Delivery volume of compressor
    - Air consumption
    - Pipeline network
    - Type and nature of on-off regulation
    - Permissible pressure difference In the pipeline

### Compressor
- It is a mechanical device which converts mechanical energy into fluid energy. The compressor increases the air pressure by reducing its volume which also increases the temperature of the compressed air. The compressor is selected based on the pressure it needs to operate and the delivery volume.
- The compressor can be classified into two main types
    1. Positive displacement
    2. Dynamic displacement
- Positive displacement compressors include piston type, vane type, diaphragm type and screw type.

#### Piston Compressors 
- Piston compressors are commonly used in pneumatic systems. The simplest form is single cylinder compressor. It produces one pulse of air per piston stroke. The single cylinder compressor gives significant amount of pressure pulses at the outlet port. The pressure developed is about 3-40 bar.

#### Double Acting Compressor 
- The pulsation of air can be reduced by using double acting compressor. It has two sets of valves and a crosshead. Pressure higher than 30bar can be produced.

#### Multistage Compressor 
- As the pressure of the air increases, its temperature rises. It is essential to reduce the air temperature to avoid damage of compressor and other mechanical elements.
- It is used to reduce the temperature of compressed air during the compression stages. The multistage compressor can develop a pressure of around 50bar.

#### Combined Two Stage Compressor 
- In this type, two-stage compression is carried out by using the same piston. Initially when the piston moves down, air is sucked in through the inlet valve.
- During the compression process, the air moves out of the exhaust valve into the intercooler.
- As the piston moves further the stepped head provided on the piston moves into the cavity thus causing the compression of air.
- Then, this is let out by the exhaust port.

#### Diaphragm Compressor
- These are small capacity compressors. In piston compressors the lubricating oil from the pistons walls may contaminate the compressed air
- The piston reciprocates by a motor driven crankshaft. 
- As the piston moves down it pulls the hydraulic fluid down causing the diaphragm to move along and the air is sucked in.
- When the piston moves up the fluid pushes the diaphragm up causing the ejection of air from the outlet port.
- Since the flexible diaphragm is placed in between the piston and the air no contamination takes place. 

#### Screw Compressor 
- For medium flow and pressure applications, screw compressor can be used. It is simple in construction with less number of moving parts. The air delivered is steady with no pressure pulsation. It has two meshing screws.
- The screws are synchronized by using external timing gears.

#### Rotary Vane Compressor 
- The principle of operation of vane compressor is similar to the hydraulic vane pump.
- The unbalanced vane compressor consists of spring-loaded vanes seating in the slots of the rotor. The pumping action occurs due to movement of the vanes along a cam ring.
- The rotor is eccentric to the cam ring. As the rotor rotates, the vanes follow the inner surface of the cam ring. The space between the vanes decreases near the outlet due to the eccentricity.
- This causes compression of the air. These compressors are free from pulsation. If the eccentricity is zero no flow takes place.

#### Lobe Compressor
- The lobe compressor is used when high delivery volume, but low pressure is needed. It consists of two lobes with one being driven and the other driving.
-The operating pressure is limited by leakage between rotors and housing. As the wear Increases during the operation, the efficiency falls rapidly.

#### Dynamic Compressor
- When very large volume of compressed air is required in applications such as ventilators, combustion system and pneumatic powder blower conveyors, the dynamic compressor can be used. The pressure needed is very low in such applications.
- Large volume of low pressure air can be provided by blowers.
- The efficiency of these compressors is better than that of reciprocating types.

## Air Treatment 
- For satisfactory operation of the pneumatic system the compressed air needs to be cleaned and dried. Atmospheric air is contaminated with dust, smoke and is humid.
- These particles can cause wear of the system components and presence of moisture may cause corrosion. Hence it is essential to treat the air to get rid of these impurities.

### Filters 
- To prevent any damage to the compressor, the contaminants present in the air need to be filtered out. This is done by using Inlet filters. These can be dry or wet filters. Dry filters use disposable cartridges. In the wet filter, the incoming air is passed through an oil bath and then through a fine wire mesh filter.

### Cooler 
- As the air is compressed, the temperature of the air increases. Therefore the air needs to be cooled. This is done by using a cooler. It is a type of heat exchanger.
- There are two types of coolers commonly employed viz. air cooled and water cooled. 

### Air Filter and Water Trap 
- Air filter and water trap is used to
    1. prevent any solid contaminants from entering In the system
    2. condense and remove water vapor that is present in the compressed air.

### Refrigerated Dryers 
- It consists of two heat exchangers, refrigerant compressor and a separator.
- The dryer chills the air just above 0 °C which condenses the water vapor. The condensate is collected by the separator.

### Chemical Dryers 
#### Absorption Dryers 
- In Adsorption dryers, the moisture collects on the sharp edges of the granular material.
- The adsorbing materials can be silicon dioxide or other materials which exist in hydrated and dehydrated state.
- These are also called as deliquescent dryers.
- It uses chemical agents like phosphoric pentoxide or calcium chloride as drying agents.
- The moisture in the compressed air chemically reacts with the drying agent.
- The agent dissolves to form a liquid compound which collects at the bottom of the dryer where it can be drained out.

## Actuators 
- Actuators are output devices which convert energy from pressurized hydraulic oil or compressed air into the required type of action or motion.
- In general, hydraulic or pneumatic systems are used for gripping and/or moving operations in industry. These operations are carried out by using actuators.
- Actuators can be classified into three types.
    - **Linear actuators**: These devices convert hydraulic/pneumatic energy into linear motion.
    - **Rotary actuators**: These devices convert hydraulic/pneumatic energy into rotary motion.
    - **Actuators to operate flow control valves****************: these are used to control the flow and pressure of fluids such as gases, steam or liquid.

### Single Acting Cylinder 
- These cylinders produce work in one direction of motion hence they are named as single acting cylinders.
- The compressed air pushes the piston located in the cylindrical barrel causing the desired motion. The return stroke takes place by the action of a spring. Generally the spring is provided on the rod side of the cylinder. 

### Double Acting Cylinder 
- The main parts of a hydraulic double acting cylinder are: piston, piston rod, cylinder tube, and end caps.
- The piston divides the cylinder into two chambers namely the rod end side and piston end side. The seals prevent the leakage of oil between these two chambers.

### Gear Motor: A Rotary Actuator 
- Rotary actuators convert energy of pressurized fluid into rotary motion.
- Rotary actuators are similar to electric motors but are run on hydraulic or pneumatic power. 

### Vane Motor: A Rotary Actuator
- A rotary vane motor consists of a rotor with sliding vanes in the slots provided on the rotor.
- The rotor is placed eccentrically with the housing.
- Air enters from the inlet port, rotates the rotor and thus torque is produced. Air is then released from the exhaust port (outlet).
- It consists of a single rotating vane connected to output shaft.
- It is used for double acting operation and has a maximum angle of rotation of about 270°. These are generally used to actuate dampers in robotics and material handling applications.

### Limited Rotation Actuators 
- It consists of a single rotating vane connected to output shaft.
- It is used for double acting operation and has a maximum angle of rotation of about 270°. These are generally used to actuate dampers in robotics and material handling applications.

## Pneumatic Controllers 
### Basic Components 
- Following are the basic components of pneumatic controller.
    1. Flapper nozzle amplifier
    2. Air relay
    3. Bellows
    4. Springs 
    5. Feedback arrangements

#### Flapper Nozzle Amplifier 
- A pneumatic control system operates with air. The signal is transmitted in the form of variable air pressure. 
- It converts very small displacement signal (in order of microns) to variation of air pressure.

#### Air Relay 
- The variation of air pressure obtained through flapper nozzle amplifier cannot be used for any useful application, unless the air handling capacity is increased. 
- It is used after the flapper nozzle amplifier to enhance the volume of air to be handled. 

## Pneumatic Controller 
### Types of Pneumatic Controllers 
- Following is the list of variants of pneumatic controllers: 
    1. Proportional only (P) controller 
    2. Proportiona-Derivative (PD) controller 
    3. Proportional-Integral (PI) controller 
    4. Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controller 

#### Proportional Only (P) Controller 
#### Proportiona-Derivative (PD) Controller
#### Proportional-Integral (PI) Controller 
#### Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) Controller

### Advantages of Pneumatic Controllers 
1. Simplicity of the components and no complex structure 
2. Easy maintainability 
3. Safe and can be used in hazardous atmospheres 
4. Low cost of installation 
5. Good reliability and reproducibility 
6. Speed of response is relatively slow but steady 
7. Limited power capacity for large mass transfer 

### Limitations of Pneumatic Controllers 
1. Slow response 
2. Difficult to operate in sub-normal temperatures 
3. Pipe-couplings can give rise to leaks in certain ambient conditions 
4. Moving parts - more maintenance 

